But, what if we face a situation in which we have access to nothing?
We are not allowed to have a Bible, no literature with illustrations, no videos, and no audio
recordings.
What do we do?
Our recollection of what we have read in the past can keep our spirituality intact.
One of our brothers from Russia faced such a situation.
The year was 1963.
I was 36 at the time.
The KGB searched my home and found some Bible literature and some publishers' field service reports.
So I was sentenced to five years of imprisonment for being an organizer.
That was the third time I had been imprisoned.
Some brothers and sisters and I went to the court to support brother Vladimir.
When he saw us, he clasped his hands and declared everything is fine.
A KGB officer told me that the only reason I hadn't been imprisoned was because I had six children, but Vladimir was single.
I was just glad that they had arrested me and not him because I didn't have a family.
In the camp I didn't have a Bible or any Bible literature at all.
All I had to keep me going was the knowledge I already had.
We prayed for him and we sent greetings and encouraging messages to him through his relatives.
Due to the strict censorship in the camp, we were not allowed to write anything spiritual in our letters to encourage each other.
If we did, the letters were confiscated.
But I really wanted to send brother Mikhail something encouraging.
I was growing flowers with a group of inmates in the camp, so instead of sending him a letter, I decided to send him a bouquet of flowers.
Vladimir's sister Olga came to our home and she brought me a beautiful bouquet of flowers from Vladimir.
I couldn't believe that I had received fresh flowers from behind a barbed wire fence from inside the camp.
I was so touched by his act of kindness that my heart moved me to write down some verses, a poem which I called the bouquet.
My relatives came and visited me in the prison and delivered to me the poem.
I kept the poem in a very secret place.
It could have been confiscated and I could have been punished because it was about God.
After Vladimir was released from prison, well, he told me that my poem had really strengthened him.
That he had often taken it out of its secret hiding place to read it over and over again.
If it hadn't been for the support I received from Jehovah and the prayers of friends, it would have been much harder for me to serve my time.
The poem that I had received helped me not to feel separated from my friends and most importantly, not from Jehovah.
So many years have now gone by, but we have remained firm through the difficult times and we continue serving Jehovah.
Lately Vladimir and I have been trying to keep in touch by phone, but we haven't seen each other for seven years.
I would really love to see Vladimir again.
He doesn't know that I've decided to go and visit him.
I hope that he likes the surprise.
I see these flowers grown by hands, pardon from work, but prison demands.
My friend has sent a bouquet.
Prison three times prevented our meeting, but you found a way to convey a greeting.
My joy now moves me to say, greetings my brother with all of my heart.
You gave me strength, although we're apart.
While you have countless trials withstood, you've strengthened me as best you could.
Greetings, my friend, on that narrow road.
You were always with me through hardships untold.
We worked so hard for spiritual treasure, blessed we were for sticking together.
You were taken from me when they tried to break our integrity, but God stood by us and helped us to cope.
Conquer the evil we did for our dear kingdom hope.
How grateful we are and always will be for spiritual vision by which we can see.
The crown of life promised to those who stay on the loyal course they chose.
I'll much you've endured long suffering friend, but Jehovah's mercy will never end.
On a paradise earth our hands will unite, planting more flowers to gladden his sight.
Christ Jesus will heal us during his reign, so no trace of sin will ever remain.
And far from the trials that we overcame, forever will praise Jehovah's great name.
True friends are such a blessing from Jehovah, and you don't really know who they are until disaster strikes.
During my whole life, walking in the way of the truth, I have often thought about the words of Psalm 119 verse 63, where it says,
I am a friend of all who fear you and of those who keep your orders.
Our serving side by side in the kingdom work is strengthened our friendship.
It's only that sort of friendship that will last forever.
What a beautiful friendship.
Our brotherhood truly is a blessing from Jehovah.
Brother Mikhail Savitsky spent many years as a circuit overseer, helping the kingdom work progress in Siberia, Northern Caucasus, and the countries of Georgia and Armenia.
In 1992, he had the privilege of being one of those who signed the documents that confirmed legal recognition of our work in Russia.
However, we regret to inform you that sometime after this segment was produced, brother Vladimir Vakolik fell asleep in death.
He was 88 years old and had served Jehovah faithfully for over 59 years.
At the time of his death, he had served as a pioneer for some 26 years, and as an elder in the congregation for 43 years.
From his interview, you can clearly see the faith that kept his spirituality strong through 12 years of imprisonment.
And he has a good example for us.
Did you notice one aspect of his circumstances while incarcerated?
He said, in the camp, I didn't have a Bible or any Bible literature at all.
All I had to keep me going was the knowledge I already had.
That could happen to us.
When persecution starts, we need to be prepared.
That's one reason why it is so important not to neglect our study of the Bible while we have the opportunity.